device-backend/control/README.md, before:

# control

The PlanktoScope's hardware controller.

Note: this is a work-in-progress refactor and is not yet ready for general use.

## Introduction

This repository contains the PlanktoScope's hardware controller, which controls the PlanktoScope's sensors and actuators, producing raw data. Currently, device control consists of:
- Hardware abstraction layers: implements a simple, mostly-uniform internal API on different underlying hardware devices, for the application-level hardware controller to be used with different hardware implementations of PlanktoScope designs.
- Application-level controller: provides device behaviors (such as stop-flow imaging) generalizable across different generations of PlanktoScopes. In software engineering jargon, this is the "business logic" of the PlanktoScope hardware-control software.
- API adapter: exposes the application-level controller with a standard public API for other software clients to use.

However, the organization of the source code does not yet reflect the organization of software functionalities.

## Usage

### Deployment

Currently the hardware controller can only be deployed as part of the distro setup scripts at [github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope](https://github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope).

Please note that for camera we rely on the Raspberry OS packages `python3-picamera2` and `python3-libcamera`.

### Development

To install all dependencies including development tooling, run:
```
poetry install --with dev --no-root
```

Then you can run the code auto-formatter on the project by running:
```
poetry run poe fmt
```

And you can run all checks (including code formatting and linting) by running:
```
poetry run poe check
```

We recommand using [https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh)

### Prerequisites

To use this project, you'll need:

- Python >= 3.9
- Poetry 2.1.2

## Licensing

Except where otherwise indicated, source code provided here is covered by the following information:

Copyright PlanktoScope project contributors

SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later

You can use the source code provided here under the [GPL 3.0 License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html).

Commit message:

backend: Separate pump and focus threads (#599)
Splits `stepper.py` into

* `stepper.py` (just the stepper class)
* `pump.py` (pump process)
* `focus.py` (focus process)
* remove shushengine complexity

device-backend/control/README.md, after:

# control

The PlanktoScope's hardware controller.

## Architecture

Each feature of the hardware is controlled by a separate process. Processes communicate between each other and with external clients using MQTT.

Please note the following particularity of Python processes

> Bear in mind that each spawned process is initialized with a copy of the memory footprint of the master process. And that the constructor code (i.e. stuff inside __init__()) is executed in the master process -- only code inside run() executes in separate processes.

https://stackoverflow.com/a/17220739

## Usage

### Deployment

Currently the hardware controller can only be deployed as part of the distro setup scripts at [github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope](https://github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope).

Please note that for camera we rely on the Raspberry OS packages `python3-picamera2` and `python3-libcamera`.

### Development

To install all dependencies including development tooling, run:
```
poetry install --with dev --no-root
```

Then you can run the code auto-formatter on the project by running:
```
poetry run poe fmt
```

And you can run all checks (including code formatting and linting) by running:
```
poetry run poe check
```

We recommand using [https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/ssh)

### Prerequisites

To use this project, you'll need:

- Python >= 3.9
- Poetry 2.1.2

## Licensing

Except where otherwise indicated, source code provided here is covered by the following information:

Copyright PlanktoScope project contributors

SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later

You can use the source code provided here under the [GPL 3.0 License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html).
