documentation/docs/faq.md, before:

# Frequently Asked Questions

This FAQ has been compiled to answer common questions about the PlanktoScope project and how you can get involved. We hope you find it useful and we look forward to working with you to advance our knowledge of the oceans!

## I want order a PlantoScope, is there anyone who sells the kits?

The best thing is to say hello in our [Slack Channel](https://planktoscope.slack.com/). Maybe someone is arranging an order or there are currently some available.

## I want to build a PlantoScope, where should I start?

If you have the technical know who then you can build it yourself, the required information can be found here in the documentation. Let others know about your intention to do this and say hello in our [Slack Channel](https://planktoscope.slack.com/), maybe someone is interested and would like to participate.

## Where do i get support or find the necessary tools to build PlantoScope?

To find the necessary tools and knowledge to produce the PlantoScope, consider visiting a [Fablab](https://fablabs.io/labs) or [Hackspaces](https://wiki.hackerspaces.org/List_of_Hacker_Spaces) in your region. These organizations often have a culture of openness and may be willing to support you with your project.

And if you have specific questions or problems, you can always report them in the [Slack Channel](https://planktoscope.slack.com/) and in the best case you will find someone there who can support you.

## I am looking for an older version of the PlantoScope where the housing could still be manufactured with a laser cutter. Where can I find the corresponding design files?

Even though the development is now focused on a more sustainable approach based on recycled wood, the design for the acrylic housing is still available on [Github](https://github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope/tree/acrylic_case).

Commit message:

Make the docs site easier to navigate (#274)
* Declutter the navbar by consolidating links into Community section

* Make header logo link back to docs homepage rather than planktoscope.org

* Simplify the footer's copyright notice for easier maintenance

* Remove the footer's Twitter link to Thibaut's personal account

* Customize docs font for consistency with landing page

* Customize navigation settings

* Restructure the docs

* Fix CI build for software changelog with fallback build date

* Fix CI build for software changelog with revision date exclusion

* Suppress CI errors for files with missing revision date, e.g. changelog

* Replace paragraph symbol with link emoji for header permalinks

* Hide the header's latest-release tag

* Consolidate command variants in nonstandard software setup with tabs

* Account for FairScope customers in standard software setup guide

* List prereqs for non-standard software setup guide

* Polish the home page

* Split up final section of standard software setup guide

* Write the index page for the setup section

* Make some improvements to the setup section's index page

* Add guide to choosing a hardware version, and hardware changelog

* Make a placeholder for v2.1 hardware manufacturing

* Add an index page for v2.5 hardware production

* Add overall software setup guide

* Add more links to the "next steps" sections of the setup guides

* Fix broken link

* Fix incorrect ordering of sections in the hardware changelog

* Add a very minimal documentation for post-installation config

documentation/docs/faq.md, after:

# Frequently Asked Questions

This FAQ has been compiled to answer common questions about the PlanktoScope project and how you can get involved. We hope you find it useful and we look forward to working with you to advance our knowledge of the oceans!

## Can I purchase a PlanktoScope?

You can purchase a PlanktoScope - either as a kit of parts to assemble yourself or as a fully preassembled device - from a small business called [FairScope](https://www.fairscope.com/), which was started by the inventor of the PlanktoScope in order to make PlanktoScopes easier to obtain. For more information, please refer to our page on [how to obtain a PlanktoScope](setup/index.md).

## How much money does a PlanktoScope cost?

For pricing of PlanktoScopes and PlanktoScope assembly kits from FairScope, refer to [the FairScope website](https://www.fairscope.com/). If you purchase all the parts to build a single PlanktoScope yourself, the cost of parts can be as low as USD 400 or USD 800 depending on the type of PlanktoScope you build.

## Where do I get support or find the necessary tools to build PlanktoScope?

To find the necessary tools and knowledge to produce the PlanktoScope, consider visiting a [Fablab](https://fablabs.io/labs) or [Hackspaces](https://wiki.hackerspaces.org/List_of_Hacker_Spaces) in your region. These organizations often have a culture of openness and may be willing to support you with your project.

And if you have specific questions or problems, you can always report them in the [Slack Channel](https://planktoscope.slack.com/) and in the best case you will find someone there who can support you.
