software/README.md, before:

# software

This directory will eventually contain various units of software related to the PlanktoScope software distribution; note that specific programs may be managed in separate repositories. Currently, this directory only contains a manual setup script (`distro/build/build.sh`) which you can run on a Raspberry Pi in order to set up the PlanktoScope software distribution on it.

## Usage

### Setup

First, flash your microSD card with the standard (32-bit) version of Raspberry Pi OS; we recommend using the Raspberry Pi OS Lite (32-bit) variant unless you plan to operate the PlanktoScope with an attached display, mouse, and keyboard. You can find further instructions at https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/

Next, insert your microSD card into the Raspberry Pi, connect a display and keyboard for setup, and boot up the Raspberry Pi by plugging in the power cable (which should be a USB-C cable, assuming you have a Raspberry Pi 4 - which is strongly recommended). Eventually, the display will show prompts asking you to choose a keyboard layout; you should choose settings appropriate for you. The display will also ask you to set a username and password for the default user account on the Raspberry Pi; you should choose `pi` as the username, and you should choose a password you can remember. By default, we use `copepode` as the password - so you may want to choose a different password for better security.

Next, configure your Raspberry Pi to get internet access. If you have an Ethernet cable you can plug into your Raspberry Pi, that will be the simplest option for setup - when we make our official SD card images with the PlanktoScope software distribution, we use an Ethernet cable. Otherwise, you will need to connect to a wifi network with internet access; you can find instructions for how to do so at https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/configuration.html#configuring-networking

Next, log in to your Raspberry Pi and (if you installed a version of Raspberry Pi OS with a graphical desktop) open a terminal. Then type in each of the following commands:

```
cd /home/pi
wget https://github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope/archive/refs/heads/stable.zip
unzip stable.zip
rm stable.zip
mv PlanktoScope-stable PlanktoScope
```

This will prepare you to install the latest stable release of the PlanktoScope software distribution; if you need to install some other release such as `beta` or `edge`, you will need to change the names accordingly in the commands above. Then you will run the following command, which will take a long time to finish:

```
/home/pi/PlanktoScope/software/distro/build/build.sh
```

If an error occurs during this setup process, you will need to wipe the Raspberry Pi's microSD card, flash the Raspberry Pi OS image onto it again, and try running the setup steps again. Otherwise, you will eventually see a message reporting that the build script finished building the PlanktoScope application environment. Then you should restart the Raspberry Pi, e.g. with the following command:

```
sudo shutdown -r now
```

Afterwards, your PlanktoScope's Raspberry Pi will either connect to a wifi network (if you had previously configured it to connect to a wifi network) or make its own local isolated wifi network. If you connect another device (e.g. a phone or computer) to the PlanktoScope's Raspberry Pi over its local isolated wifi network or over an Ethernet cable, then you can open a web browser on the device to access the PlanktoScope's dashboard at one of the following URLs (try them in the following order, and just use the first one which works):

- http://home.planktoscope:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if your web browser isn't configured to use a Private DNS provider)
- http://planktoscope.local:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if you're on a device which supports mDNS)
- http://192.168.4.1:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if you're connected over the PlanktoScope's isolated wifi network)
- http://192.168.5.1:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if you're connected over Ethernet)

### SD card cloning

If you would like to clone the Raspberry Pi's SD card to an image file which you can write to other SD cards, you should follow the instructions at https://github.com/mgomesborges/raspberry-pi/blob/master/setup/clone-sd-card.md or https://raspberrytips.com/create-image-sd-card/ . For example, if you are using a Linux computer and the SD card shows up as `/dev/mmcblk0`, you could run the following command (replacing file paths and names accordingly):

```
sudo dd bs=4M if=/dev/mmcblk0 of=/some/path/here/image-name-here.img
```

This will create a `.img` file as large as your SD card - make sure you have enough space on your hard drive for the file! You can then shrink and compress the file using the [PiShrink tool](https://github.com/Drewsif/PiShrink). For example, on Linux you could run the following set of commands (again replacing file paths and names accordingly):

```
cd /some/path/here
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Drewsif/PiShrink/master/pishrink.sh
chmod +x pishrink.sh
sudo ./pishrink.sh -za image-name-here.img
```

If you had set up the PlanktoScope software on a Raspberry Pi OS Lite image, you should get a `image-name-here.img.gz` file which is approximately 1 GB in size.

Commit message:

Unify support for different HAT types into the same branch of the repo (#187)
* Update setup scripts for split of hardware control vs. segmentation

* Update cleanup scripts for the split backend

* Modify Node-RED to start both the hardware controller and the segmenter

* Show controller & segmenter logs separately; remove Git-based updating

* Update Node-RED's page for the embedded dataset file browser

* Show Node-RED errors separately; show OS logs with Cockpit embed

* Try to supervise the Python backend from systemd instead of Node-RED

* Fix problems with systemd services for device-backend

* Add filebrowser for backend logs; link to logs (don't embed viewer)

* Restore kernel driver support for the RV3028 RTC, in case we need it

* Import eepromutils from the v2.3-pscopehat release

* Try to converge the Node-RED flow towards the pscopehat Node-RED flow

* Copy Node-RED flow in from pscopehat branch; select HAT in setup scripts

* Fix incorrect filename in the backend setup script

* Fix incorrect path in the backend setup script

* Fix incorrect path in the node-red dashboard setup script

* Replay Node-RED flow changes since v2.3 onto the pscopehat Node-RED flow

* Update adafruithat Node-RED flow for the HAT-specific backend service

* Fix an error in the service name in the previous commit

* Get device-backend from the main branch (the feature branch was merged)

* Make the `smbus2` Python available to Node-RED again

* Add a deprecation note about accessing Node-RED over port 1880

* Modify Node-RED settings file to check env vars for values

* Try to remove Node-RED projects mode, simplify flows dir structure

* Fix typo in Node-RED settings file

* Make Node-RED host binding configurable by env var, too

software/README.md, after:

# software

This directory will eventually contain various units of software related to the PlanktoScope software distribution; note that specific programs may be managed in separate repositories. Currently, this directory only contains a manual setup script (`distro/setup/setup.sh`) which you can run on a Raspberry Pi in order to set up the PlanktoScope software distribution on it.

## Usage

### Setup

First, flash your microSD card with the standard (32-bit) version of Raspberry Pi OS; we recommend using the Raspberry Pi OS Lite (32-bit) variant unless you plan to operate the PlanktoScope with an attached display, mouse, and keyboard. You can find further instructions at https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/

Next, insert your microSD card into the Raspberry Pi, connect a display and keyboard for setup, and boot up the Raspberry Pi by plugging in the power cable (which should be a USB-C cable, assuming you have a Raspberry Pi 4 - which is strongly recommended). Eventually, the display will show prompts asking you to choose a keyboard layout; you should choose settings appropriate for you. The display will also ask you to set a username and password for the default user account on the Raspberry Pi; you should choose `pi` as the username, and you should choose a password you can remember. By default, we use `copepode` as the password - so you may want to choose a different password for better security.

Next, configure your Raspberry Pi to get internet access. If you have an Ethernet cable you can plug into your Raspberry Pi, that will be the simplest option for setup - when we make our official SD card images with the PlanktoScope software distribution, we use an Ethernet cable. Otherwise, you will need to connect to a wifi network with internet access; you can find instructions for how to do so at https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/computers/configuration.html#configuring-networking

Next, log in to your Raspberry Pi and (if you installed a version of Raspberry Pi OS with a graphical desktop) open a terminal. Then type in each of the following commands:

```
cd /home/pi
wget https://github.com/PlanktoScope/PlanktoScope/archive/refs/heads/stable.zip
unzip stable.zip
rm stable.zip
mv PlanktoScope-stable /home/pi/PlanktoScope
```

This will prepare you to install the latest stable release of the PlanktoScope software distribution; if you need to install some other release such as `beta` or `edge`, you will need to change the names accordingly in the commands above. Then you will run one of the two following commands, depending on whether your PlanktoScope has the Adafruit Stepper HAT or the custom PlanktoScope HAT:

```
/home/pi/PlanktoScope/software/distro/setup/setup.sh adafruithat
```

```
/home/pi/PlanktoScope/software/distro/setup/setup.sh pscopehat
```

The setup script will take a long time (at least 30 minutes, depending on the speed of your internet connection) to complete.

If an error occurs during this setup process, you will need to wipe the Raspberry Pi's microSD card, flash the Raspberry Pi OS image onto it again, and try running the setup steps again. Otherwise, you will eventually see a message reporting that the setup script finished setting up the PlanktoScope application environment. Then you should restart the Raspberry Pi, e.g. with the following command:

```
sudo shutdown -r now
```

Afterwards, your PlanktoScope's Raspberry Pi will either connect to a wifi network (if you had previously configured it to connect to a wifi network) or make its own local isolated wifi network. If you connect another device (e.g. a phone or computer) to the PlanktoScope's Raspberry Pi over its local isolated wifi network or over an Ethernet cable, then you can open a web browser on the device to access the PlanktoScope's dashboard at one of the following URLs (try them in the following order, and just use the first one which works):

- http://home.planktoscope:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if your web browser isn't configured to use a Private DNS provider)
- http://planktoscope.local:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if you're on a device which supports mDNS)
- http://192.168.4.1:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if you're connected over the PlanktoScope's isolated wifi network)
- http://192.168.5.1:1880/ps/node-red-v2/ui (if you're connected over Ethernet)

### SD card cloning

If you would like to clone the Raspberry Pi's SD card to an image file which you can write to other SD cards, you should follow the instructions at https://github.com/mgomesborges/raspberry-pi/blob/master/setup/clone-sd-card.md or https://raspberrytips.com/create-image-sd-card/ . For example, if you are using a Linux computer and the SD card shows up as `/dev/mmcblk0`, you could run the following command (replacing file paths and names accordingly):

```
sudo dd bs=4M if=/dev/mmcblk0 of=/some/path/here/image-name-here.img
```

This will create a `.img` file as large as your SD card - make sure you have enough space on your hard drive for the file! You can then shrink and compress the file using the [PiShrink tool](https://github.com/Drewsif/PiShrink). For example, on Linux you could run the following set of commands (again replacing file paths and names accordingly):

```
cd /some/path/here
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Drewsif/PiShrink/master/pishrink.sh
chmod +x pishrink.sh
sudo ./pishrink.sh -za image-name-here.img
```

If you had set up the PlanktoScope software on a Raspberry Pi OS Lite image, you should get a `image-name-here.img.gz` file which is approximately 1 GB in size.
